The BES will be installed in the /usr directory on your Mac. This will
require root access.

After [downloading](http://www.opendap.org/download/BES.html) the .dmg
for either an Intel Mac or PPC Mac, double click on the .dmg file. A new
disk will be opened on your desktop that looks something like this:

<figure>
<img src="Hyrax_1_1_BES_Disk_image.jpg"
title="Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Disk_image.jpg" />
<figcaption>Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Disk_image.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

Double click on the disk image on the left. This will open up a Finder
window that contains the bes-3.4.1 package file (.pkg).

<figure>
<img src="Hyrax_1_1_BES_Package_image.jpg"
title="Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Package_image.jpg" />
<figcaption>Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Package_image.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

Double click on the package file. This will begin the installation
process for the BES by opening up the installer.

<figure>
<img src="Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer_image.jpg"
title="Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer_image.jpg" />
<figcaption>Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer_image.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

Click continue...

<figure>
<img src="Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer2_image.jpg"
title="Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer2_image.jpg" />
<figcaption>Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer2_image.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

Make sure to select the disk where you want to install the BES, usually
the Macintosh HD. Then click Continue...

<figure>
<img src="Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer3_image.jpg"
title="Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer3_image.jpg" />
<figcaption>Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer3_image.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

Click on the Install button. Since this requires root access, if you are
not logged in as root, you should see an Authenticate dialog box pop up
asking for the root Name and Password, something like this...

<figure>
<img src="Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer4_image.jpg"
title="Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer4_image.jpg" />
<figcaption>Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer4_image.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

Type in your root username and password and click on OK. If all went
well, then you should see this window...

<figure>
<img src="Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer5_image.jpg"
title="Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer5_image.jpg" />
<figcaption>Image:Hyrax_1_1_BES_Installer5_image.jpg</figcaption>
</figure>

Click on the close button. Now, the BES should be installed in your /usr
directory. To make sure, you should see the file /usr/bin/besctl.