## System Administrator's Workshop

Monday 15 October to Tuesday 16 October

This workshop targets the system administrator whose task is to setup a
data service for interactive users, batch processes, and high level web
services, that will access netcdf, hdf, or freeform data in a file
system or SQL data in a database. The workshop will provide them with
the information they need to install and configure Hyrax along with some
background on available clients so they can test their servers and give
basic advice to users.

## Agenda and Presentations

9:00am Monday - Start of System Administrator's workshop [Overview of
OPeNDAP server and client
technology](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/OPeNDAP_BOM_intro_20071015.ppt)

10:00 am Monday - break around 10:30am [Architecture and Design of Hyrax
(system admin point of
view)](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_2r3_HyraxArchitecture.ppt)
[Installation of
Hyrax](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_3_4r1_Installation.ppt)

12:30pm Monday - Lunch

1:30pm Monday [Hands-on to installation and setup of
Hyrax](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_5r1_hyrax_hands_on.ppt)

2:30pm Monday [Testing the server
installation](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_6r0_Testing_the_installation.ppt)

3:00pm Monday [Commonly used clients and their different
characteristics](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_15r0_Clients_and_Searching.ppt)

4:00pm Monday [Use-Case for operational services (10 min. presentation
on
Tuesday)](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/OPeNDAP_BOM_usecases_20071015.ppt)

5:00pm Monday - Retire until Tuesday morning at 9:00am

Workshop dinner

9:00am Tuesday - start of 2nd day of workshop
*Presentations of Use-Case for operational services* \[not yet
complete\]

10:30am Tuesday [Configuration of the data
handlers](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_7r0_DataHandlers.ppt)

12:30pm Tuesday - Lunch

1:30pm Tuesday [Installation Advanced
issues](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_10r1_InstallationAdvancedTopics.ppt)

2:00pm Tuesday *Use-Case presentations* \[not yet complete\]

3:00pm Tuesday [Other services hosted within
Hyrax](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_12r1.ppt) [Future
Development Plans](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/SAW_13r1.ppt)

4:00pm Tuesday [Hands-on advanced topics and
issues](http://www.opendap.org/support/bom_saw/OPeNDAP_BOM_workinggroups_20071015.ppt)

5:00pm Tuesday - End of System Administrator's Workshop

All attendees are asked to bring a PC laptop and will be given a Linux
virtual machine. If people want to use a Mac, they will have to be able
to 'roll with the punches' when it comes to building code in that
environment.

We will provide attendees with a binder for the lecture and hands-on
info.

More information about the [OPeNDAP workshops is available
here](http://opendap.bom.gov.au/opendap_workshops/).