## Background

Prior to Hyrax 1.5 THREDDS catalog functionality in Hyrax was provided
using an imported implementation of THREDDS. This was a large and
complex dependancy for Hyrax, and the implementation had significant
scalability problems for large catalogs (Catalogs with 20k or more
entries would consume all available memory.)

In response to this we have written new code for Hyrax. We have replaced
the imported code with 2 OLFS handlers.

## BES THREDDS Handler

The *opendap.bes.BESThreddsDispatchHandler* provides THREDDS catalogs
for all data served from a BES. It requires no configuration. Simply
adding it to the olfs configuration (file:
*\$CATALINA_HOME/content/opendap/olfs.xml*) will provide THREDDS
catalogs for data served from the BES.

This handler uses XSL transforms to convert the BES <showCatalog>
response into a THREDDS catalog.

### Default Configuration

`           `<Handler className="opendap.bes.BESThreddsDispatchHandler" />

## THREDDS Dispatch Handler

The *opendap.threddsHandler.Dispatch* handler provides THREDDS catalog
functionality for static THREDDS catalogs located on the system with the
OLFS. The handler uses XSL transforms to provide HTML presentation views
of both the catalogs and individual datasets within the catalog. Much
like the TDS, data access links are available on the dataset pages (if
the catalog contains the information for the access links).

### Memory Caching

The implementation can be configured to use memory caching of THREDDS
catalogs to improve speed and reduce disk thrashing.

When memory caching is enabled, the handler will traverse the local
THREDDS catalogs at startup. Each catalog file will be read into a
memory buffer and cached. The memory buffer is parsed to verify that the
catalog represents valid XML, but the resulting document is not saved.
When a *thredds:catalogRef* element is encountered during the traversal
its *href* is evaluated:

- If the *href* is a relative URL (does not begin with a "/" or
  "http://'') then the catalog is traversed and cached.
- If the *href* begins with a "/" character it is assumed that the
  catalog is being provided by another service on the same system, and
  it is not traversed or cached.
- If the *href* begins with a "<http://>" it is assumed to be a remotely
  hosted catalog provided by another service on a different system, and
  it is not traversed or cached.

When a client asks for an XML catalog response, the entire cached buffer
for the catalog is dumped to the client in a single write command. This
should be very fast, as all that must happen is an existing byte buffer
is written to the response stream.

If the client is asking for an HTML view of the catalog, the buffer is
parsed and passed through an XSL transform to generate the HTML page.
The thinking behind this is that machines will be traversing the XML
files and would require very fast response times, while humans will be
traversing the HTML views of the catalog and the latency generated by
parsing and performing the transform would be acceptable to most users.

If memory caching is disabled, then the start up remains the same,
except no data is cached. Subsequent client requests for THREDDS
products are handled in the same manner as before, only the catalog
content is read from disk each time. Although this means that the XML
responses will be much slower, it will scale to handle much larger
static catalog collections.

#### Cache Updates

Each time a catalog request is processed the source file's last modified
date is checked. If the catalog in memory was cached prior to the last
modified date, it and all of it's descendants in the catalog hierarchy
are purged from the cache and reloaded.

### prefix

This handler requires a prefix element in the configuration:
<prefix>`thredds`</prefix>The value of the prefix element is used by the
handler to identify requests intended for it. Basically it will claim
any request whose path begins with the prefix.

For example, if the prefix is set to "thredds", then this request:


*http://localhost:8080/opendap/thredds/catalog.xml*

Will be claimed by the handler while this request:


*http://localhost:8080/opendap/catalog.xml*

Will not. (Although it would be claimed by the BES THREDDS Handler)

### Presentation View (HTML)

Supplanting the *.xml* at the end of a catalog's name with *.html* will
cause the opendap.threddsHandler.Dispatch to return an HTML presentation
view of the catalog. This is accomplished by parsing the catalog.xml
document (either from memory if cached, or from disk if not) and running
the resulting document through an XSL transform. All the metadata for
all thredds:dataset elements can be inspected in a separate HTML page
that details the dataset. This page is also generated by an XSL
transform applied to the catalog XML document.

### Default configuration

`           `<Handler className="opendap.threddsHandler.Dispatch">
`               `<prefix>`thredds`</prefix>
`               `<useMemoryCache>`true`</useMemoryCache>
`           `</Handler>

[Category:Hyrax](Category:Hyrax "wikilink")
[Category:THREDDS](Category:THREDDS "wikilink")