## Note

The Working Group Terms of Reference provide guidance for the Working
Group Executive on running the working groups. In all cases, if
something arises that is not covered here, the executive will discuss it
and add information to the terms unless any member of the executive
feels it should be taken to the community as a whole or to the OPeNDAP
president/advisory board (to whom the executive reports).

## Terms of Reference

This outline was provided by Denis Nadeau.

### Background of the Working Groups

In open discussion at the February 2007 OPeNDAP Developer Meeting,
agreement was reached on forming several OPeNDAP working groups (OWG).
Each group was to have a specific focus, deliverables, timeframe, and a
minimum membership of three people. An OWG executive would first
formalize the OWG Terms of Reference and then charter each OWG for which
a minimum number of members volunteered. A number of possible focus
areas for OWG's were discussed.

### Working Group Goals

Each OPeNDAP Working Group is established to apply members' expertise in
their focus area to produce specific deliverables or outcomes, as listed
in the charter for the group. The charter should identify the specific
focus of the Group and the desired deliverables or outcomes. An OPeNDAP
Working Group becomes established when the OWG Executive approves its
charter.

### Working Group Expected Outputs

Deliverables produced by an OWG fall into two categories.

1.  Software
    - Prototypes *or*
    - Production
2.  Documentation, including:
    - Software specifications
    - Standard Operating Procedure documents
    - Best Practices documents
    - Technical Notes.

In some cases the OWG may recommend that the ideas developed be taken to
a more formal standards organization to be developed further.

### Working Group Formation

Three people, each from a different institution, constitute the quorum
needed to form a working group. Once the working group is assembled, the
Working Group Executive must agree that the working group may form by a
majority vote. After that vote, the working group proceeds with the
blessing of the Working Group Executive. This means they may freely use
the OPeNDAP resources set aside for Working Groups and that any
documents, et c., they produce become part of the permanent record of
that working group.

#### Who can become a member

Anyone can become a member of a Working Group, subject to the following
limitations. Since working groups are expected to last no more than
three months, simultaneous membership should be limited to two Working
Groups so that individuals will not become over-committed. A Working
Group's quorum is designed to provide a balance between a breadth of
perspective versus the focus provided by a small group. Working Groups
should be small so they can work efficiently while still incorporating
the perspective of several people and/or organizations. Toward this end,
the quorum should be made up of people from different organizations
where 'organization' will be interpreted by the Working Group Executive.
In general, a government agency is made up of many 'organizations.'

#### How to become a member

People may become a member of a working group by volunteering on the
docs.opendap.org web site. There will be a list of proposed Working
Groups there; people may volunteer by adding their name and email
address after the Working Group name. Any member of the OPeNDAP
community may also propose a new Working Group and volunteer for that
group. People can get write access to the site by sending a request to
the docs.opendap.org webmaster or an OPeNDAP corporate officer.

### Working Group Themes

Initial working groups have been established for
[Authentication](Authentication "wikilink") and
[Security](Security "wikilink"). Other proposed working groups still
looking for enough members include Virtualization (Aggregation),
Semantics, Geospatial Interoperability, and DAP4. Additional possible
working group themes are maintained under [Working
Groups](Working_Groups "wikilink"). Some of the unresolved issues in
each of these areas that new working groups could help resolve are
discussed in the [2007 Developer's
Workshop](Report_on_the_2007_OPeNDAP_Developer%27s_Workshop "wikilink").

### Time table and action plan

OWGs should aim to complete their discussions, white papers,
documents/proposals within a nominal 3 month timeframe. In cases where
prototypes/software are to be produced the timeframe can be extended
with OWG executive approval), especially where funding is sought to
complete the project. The intent is not to have stagnant or dormant
efforts.