## Description

The File Out NetCDF module provides the ability to return OPeNDAP
DataDDS objects as netcdf files. The module takes an OPeNDAP DataDDS and
translates the attributes, data structure, and data into a netcdf file
and streams the resulting file back to the caller. Currently, simple
types, arrays, structures and grids are supported. Sequences are not yet
supported.

Go to [this page](BES_File_Out_NetCDF "wikilink") for more information
on the specifics of how OPeNDAP data objects are written to NetCDF.

## Status

Stable release 1.3.2 with Hyrax 1.12

## Services Handled

This module does not handle any services but adds to an existing service

## Services Provided

The module provides an additional format to the `dap` service's `dods`
command. The format is used to specify a "returnAs" format. Typically
you will see responses of the dap2 format. This module provides the
additional format of returning the OPenDAP data object as a netcdf file.

## Download

The latest version of this handler is included in the BES RPM
distribution as of Hyrax 1.12, which you can download from the [Hyrax
download page](http://opendap.org/download/hyrax). You can get the
source code for this module from the
[BES](https://github.com/OPENDAP/bes) or
[fileout_netcdf](https://github.com/OPENDAP/fileout_netcdf) projects
from guthub. The BES project can be used to all of the source we use
when building the bES for inclusion in the Hyrax releases; the
fileout_netcdf project can be used to get just the source code for the
module.

## How to use the module

Once installed, the fonc.conf file is installed in the BES
etc/bes/modules directory and is automatically loaded by the BES at
startup. There is a configuration option that you can change for this
module. The `FONc.Tempdir` parameter in the fonc.conf configuration file
tells the module where to store the netcdf files generated by the module
until the file is streamed back to the caller. The default value for
this parameter is the /tmp directory. You should change this to a
location where there is plenty of disk space/quota that is owned by the
user set to run the BES.

`FONc.Tempdir=/tmp`

Other BES keys that can be used to control the handler's behavior:

`FONc.UseCompression=true`

Use compression when making netCDF4 files; true by default

`FONc.ChunkSize=4096`

The default chunk size when making netCDF4 files, in KBytes (4k by
default)

`FONc.ClassicModel=true`

When making a netCDF4 file, use only the 'classic' netCDF data model;
true by default.

The next time the BES is started it will load this module. And, once
installed, the OLFS will know that it can use this module to transform
your data. Next to a dataset you will see the list of data products
provided for that dataset. This will include a link for File Out Netcdf.

If not using the OLFS to serve your data, for example if using the
bescmdln, you would run a command file that would look something like
this:

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <request reqID="some_unique_value" >
        <setContext name="dap_format">dap2</setContext>
        <setContainer name="c" space="catalog">data/nc/fnoc1.nc</setContainer>
        <define name="d">
        <container name="c" />
        </define>
        <get type="dods" definition="d" returnAs="netcdf"/>
    </request>

[FileOut Netcdf](Category:BES_Modules "wikilink")