# Documenting Your Data

OPeNDAP's version 3.5 server contains provisions for supplying
documentation to users about a server, and also about the data that
server provides. When a server receives an information request (through
the <font color='green'>info</font> service that invokes the
<font color='green'>dap_usage</font> program), it returns to the client
an HTML document created from the DAS and DDS of the referenced data. It
may also return information about the server, and more detail about the
dataset.

Users access this information by appending
<font color='green'>.info</font> to a DAP URL. For example to get the
HTML info page for an netCDF file, you might type something like this:

    http://test.opendap.org/opendap/nph-dods/data/nc/fnoc1.nc.info

The Info service will return important information about your dataset
even if you do not write custom HTML files for it. If you do write those
files they will be concatenated with the default information returned by
the usage server.

If you would like to provide more information about a dataset than is
contained in the DAS and DDS, simply create an HTML document (without
the <font color='green'>html</font> and <font color='green'>body</font>
tags, which are supplied by the <font color='green'>info</font>
service), and store it in the same directory as the dataset, with a name
corresponding to the dataset filename. For example, the dataset
<font color='green'>fnoc1.nc</font> might be documented with a file
called <font color='green'>fnoc1.html</font>.

You can also provide documentation for a class of files that may have a
common root in their names. For example, a file that would be used for
data files called <font color='green'>S00443.nc</font>,
<font color='green'>S00444.nc</font> and
<font color='green'>S00445.nc</font> could be called
<font color='green'>S.html</font> (or
<font color='green'>S00.html</font> in this case). This file should be
located in the directory where the data is located.

If you'd like to append information to the
<font color='green'>info</font> message for all the files on a server,
you can write a file called servername <font color='green'>.html</font>,
where servername is one of <font color='green'>nc</font>,
<font color='green'>ff</font>, <font color='green'>hdf</font>,
<font color='green'>jg</font>, and so on.

You may prefer to override this method of creating documentation and
simply provide a single, complete HTML document that contains general
information for a dataset. If you call your documentation file
<font color='green'>fnoc2.ovr</font>, the client will see only the
contents of that file, and will not get the text generated by the
dataset DAS and DDS, or the servername<font color='green'>.html</font>
file.

More information about providing user information, including sample HTML
files, and a complete description of the search procedure for finding
the dataset documentation, may be found in
\[<http://docs.opendap.org/index.php/ProgrammerGuide><cite> The OPeNDAP
Programmer's Guide</cite>\] .

## Special Instructions for the OPeNDAP/JGOFS Handler

The JGOFS handler provides usage data in almost the same way as the
other servers, but the <font color='green'>dap_usage</font> helper
program is called <font color='green'>usage-jg</font>, and it functions
slightly differently. For the general JGOFS handler and for each data
object it serves, you can write a HTML document which the usage server
will return when requested by users. You can write a HTML document that
describes any special features of your particular JGOFS handler and save
that document in a file named <font color='green'>jg.html</font> in the
cgi-bin directory that holds the server programs.

> \[Tip:\]The <font color='green'>jg.html</font> file could be used to
> provide descriptive information, including the names, for all the data
> objects served at your site.

The only special thing about this file is that you should include only
those HTML tags that would fall between the
<font color='green'>body</font> and <font color='green'>body</font>
tags. Thus it should not contain the <font color='green'>html</font>,
<font color='green'>head</font>, <font color='green'>body</font> or
their matching counterparts.

To provide HTML for each JGOFS data object you serve, create a file
whose name is based on the names of the data object you want to
describe. For example, a file that would be used for all the
<font color='green'>s87_xbt</font> data object used in the previous
section's example would be <font color='green'>s87_xbt.html</font>. This
file must be located in the directory where the top-level datafile is
located, as defined in the data objects dictionary.

Users access this information by appending
<font color='green'>.info</font> to a DAP URL. For example to get the
HTML page for the URL used in the previous section, you'd type:

    http://dods.gso.uri.edu/cgi-bin/nph-dods/s87_xbt.info